The "best" strategy usually involves a combination of database optimization and front-end debouncing.

1. Is SQLite fast enough?
Actually, yes. SQLite can handle "per-keystroke" queries on indexes with hundreds of thousands of rows in under 10ms, provided you aren't doing full-table scans.

The "slow" part of SQLite is usually writing, not reading. Since your indexing program handles the writes in the background, your search queries just need to be optimized for read speed.

Optimized SQL Approaches
Instead of a standard LIKE '%query%' (which forces a slow full-table scan), use these:

The LIKE 'query%' Trick: If you only search from the beginning of a filename, SQLite can use a standard B-Tree index.

FTS5 (Full-Text Search): This is a built-in SQLite extension specifically designed for fast searching. It creates a virtual table that uses an "inverted index."

Pros: Extremely fast; supports prefix matching (e.g., SELECT * FROM idx WHERE name MATCH 'prog*';).

Cons: Increases the size of your database file.

2. Strategies for Speed
A. Use an In-Memory "Shadow" Index
If your index isn't gigabytes in size, you can load the searchable columns into an in-memory SQLite database (:memory:) at startup.

How: Periodically sync the disk-based DB to the memory DB.

Result: Zero disk I/O during the search, making it near-instant.

B. Debouncing (The most important UI fix)
Don't actually fire a query for every single keystroke if the user is typing 100 words per minute. Use debouncing.

The Logic: Wait for a short pause (e.g., 50–100ms) after a keystroke before sending the query. If another key is pressed during that window, reset the timer. This prevents "query spam" while still feeling "real-time" to the human eye.

C. Connection Pooling & WAL Mode
Ensure your database is in WAL (Write-Ahead Logging) Mode. This allows your indexing program to write to the database while your UI reads from it simultaneously without locking each other out.

PRAGMA journal_mode=WAL;

Component Strategy
Database  Use FTS5 virtual tables for the filenames/paths.
Query     LogicUse MATCH queries with a wildcard (e.g., term*).
Backend   Keep a single persistent connection open (don't open/close for every letter).
Frontend  Debounce input by 100ms and cancel the previous "pending" request if a new one starts.